1.  three measures taken by the British government to repress the movement started against the Rowlatt Act
2. .  were the two types of demands ed by Gandhi in his letter to Viceroy Irwin on 31 January 1930?  was the abolition of ‘salt tax’ the most stirring demand? .
3.   three objectives of the ‘National Jute Policy, 2005’.
4.  is India not able to perform to her full potential in iron and steel production?   three reasons.
5.  are means of transport and communication complementary to each other?  with three .
6.  are pressure groups?  are they different from political parties? . 
7.  do you feel that democracy is better than  other form of government? .
8.  with   some countries face foundational challenge of democracy.
9.  are local companies benefitted by collaborating with multinational corporations?  with .
10. Cheap and affordable credit is essential for poor households both in rural and urban areas’. In the light of the above ment,  the social and economic values attached to it.
11.  the ‘Right to Seek Redressal’ with an example.
12.  the role of culture in shaping the feelings of nationalism in Europe from 1830 to the end of the 19th century.
13.   five features of the ‘Go East Movement’.
14.  did Gandhi start the ‘Civil Disobedience Movement’?
  four features of the movement
15.  is it necessary to conserve mineral resources? Suggest  four ways to conserve mineral resources
16. Advancement of the international trade of a country is an index of its economic prosperity’.  the ment with five arguments
17. No party system is ideal for all countries and in all situations’.
 the ment with five arguments
18. Democracies do not appear to be very successful in reducing economic inequalities’.  the ment with 
19. .  are the two categories of sources of credit?  four features of each.
20.  has improvement in technology stimulated the globalisation process?  with five . 
21. .   three loan activities of banks in India.
22. .  do pressure groups and movements strengthen democracy? 
23. . “Minerals are unevenly distributed in India”.  the ment
with 
24. .   three features of ‘Golden Quadrilateral’ Super
Highways
25.  the role of opposition political parties in Democracy
26. .   three economic hardships faced by Europe in the
1830s
27.   three problems faced by French in the sphere of education in Vietnam.
28. On  the  basis  of    values  will  it  be  fair  expectation  that democracy  should produce a harmonious social life? 
29.  did Gandhi decide to withdraw the ‘Non-Cooperation Movement’
in February, 1922?   three reasons
30.  the role of business classes in the ‘Civil Disobedience
Movement’
31.     three  characteristics  of  the  Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur
Iron-ore  belt  in India
32.   is  liberalisation?      four  effects  of  liberalisation  on the  Indian economy
33. .  the measures taken by Gandhiji to eliminate the problem of untouchability
34.   five factors affecting the location of industries in India

35.   five positive effects of globalisation on the Indian economy.
36. . The first clear expression of nationalism came with the “French
Revolution in 1789”.  the ment
37.  the reasons that forced America to withdraw from the Vietnam
War
38. .“No  party  system  is  ideal  for  all  countries  and  in all  situation”.
  the ment
39. .  the role of chemical industries in the Indian economy
40.   five characteristics of democracy
41.    three  provisions  of  amendment  made  in  'Indian Constitution'  in  1992 for making 'Three-Tier' government more effective and powerful

42.  is the issue of sustainability important for development?  with .
43.   the  impact  of ‘Rinderpest’on  people's  livelihoods  and
local  economy  in Africa in the 1890s
44.     three  major  problems  faced  by  Indian  cotton  weavers  in nineteenth century.
45.   three steps taken to clean up London during nineteenth century.
46.  the service conditions of organized sector with that of unorganized sector
47. 'The   'Print   Revolution'   had   transformed   the   lives   of   people changing   their relationship to information and knowledge.”  the ment.
48.  between the themes of 'Pride and Prejudice and 'Jane Eyre' novels written by Jane Austen and Charlotte Bronte respectively.
49. .  has  ever  increasing  number  of  industries  in  India  made worse  position  by exerting pressure on existing fresh water resources? .
50. “Dense  and  efficient  network  of  transport  is  a  pre-requisite  for
local  and  national development”  the ment
51.  the three factors that are crucial in deciding the outcome of politics of social divisions
52.  is cheap and affordable credit important for the country’s
development?   three reasons
53. Secularism it not an ideology of some political parties or persons,but
It is one of the foundations of our country."  the ment
54.   has  foreign  trade  been  integrating  markets  of  different countries?    with 
55.  do we feel the impact of globalization on our daily life?  with 
56. The  Government  of  India  has  introduced  various  institutional and  technological reforms  to reforms to  improve  agriculture in  the  1980s and  1990s” this ment with 
57. .   five major functions of political panics performed in a democracy
58. “Democracy  stands  much  superior  to    other  form  of government  in  promoting dignity and freedom of the individual.”  this ment.
59. "Democracies  lead  to peaceful  and  harmonious  life  among  citizens.'   this ment.
60. .  did Non-Cooperation movement start with participation of middle  class people in the cities?  its impact on the economic front
61.  was Congress reluctant to allow women to hold  position of authority within the organization?  did  women  participate  in  Civil  Disobedience Movement? .
62.    is   the   economic   strength   of   a   country   measured   by
the   development   of manufacturing industries?  with 
63.  the explosive conditions that prevailed in Balkans after
1871 in Europe
64.   the  role  of  different  religious  groups  in  the  development  of anti-colonial feelings in Vietnam
65.  the ideology of liberalism during early 19th  century.  
66.  the role of Ho Chi Minh in the Vietse struggle for independence 
67. “Print culture created the conditions within  French Revolution occurred.”  the    3 ment with suitable arguments.
68. “Pariksha Guru is  considered landmark in  the history of  Hindi novel.”  the  ment with suitable arguments.
69. “Multi-  purpose  projects  and  large  dams  have  come  under  great  scrutiny.”  Identify  the    3 problems caused by the setting up of these projects and dams.
70. “India is heading towards water scarcity.” Trace the possible solutions tackle this problem.
71. Establish the difference between Commercial farming and Subsistence farming with the help    3 of a suitable example
72.   three important features of Federalism.   
73.   three major steps taken by the Indian Government towards decentralization in 1992.
74. “In a democracy, political expression of social divisions is very normal and can be healthy.”    3
 with suitable .
75.  is Democracy a better form of government when compared with dictatorship or  other    3 alternative government?
76. ‘Sustainable  Development  is  a  crucial  step  for the  development  of  a  country’.    with   suitable  
77.   are  formal  sources  of  credit  preferred  over  the  informal  source  of  credit?    three    3 reasons
78.  is credit a crucial element in the economic development?

79.  Critically  the impact of globalization in India. 
80.  the role of MNCs in the economic development of a country.
81.      the impact of Great Depression on Indian economy. 
82.  the impact of the First World war on Indian industries.
83.  the effects of nineteenth century city development on ecology and environment?
85. The Civil Disobedience Movement saw the participation of different social classes and groups.    5
  reasons  for  the  participation  of  the  following:  a)  rich  peasants  b)  poor  peasants  c)
business classes d) industrial working classes e) women  
86. 
The middle classes played an important role in the Non-Cooperation Movement in the cities. .  do you think that the movement slowed down in the cities?  
87.   are maximum Jute textile mills located in the Hugli Basin?                  
88.    “Advancement  of  international  trade  of  a  country  is  an  index  to  its  economic  prosperity”.    5
Elaborate with .
89.   three forms in  communalism is expressed in politics.  the solution    5 provided by the Constitution framers of India to meet this challenge
90.  the situations  display lack of internal democracy within a political party.
91. Exhibit the role of money and muscle power among political parties during elections
92. S  tertiary sector has emerged as the largest producing sector in India
93.  the significance of French revolution on the history of France.
94.  Lenin's 'April Theses'
95.  Lenin's 'April Theses'
96.  did Weimar Republic set up in Germ after the first world war, become unpopular?  three reasons.
97.  did Weimar Republic set up in Germ after the first world war become unpopular?  three reasons.
98.  the significance of French revolution in the history of France.
 99.  is the latitudinal extent of India?  does it influence our lives?  giving two .
 100.  the three parallel ranges of the Himalayas.  main feature of each range. 
101.  are the Peninsular rivers of India different from those of the Himalayas?   three points of distinction.
102.   three difficulties faced by the people in a non-democratic country. 
103.   three arguments against democracy.
 104  is human capital the most important factor of production?  three reasons. 
105.  have countries like Japan become rich and developed?  three reasons.
106.  the meaning of disaster risk.  the four elements of emergency disaster management. 
 107.   three effects of floods
108.  various reforms introduced by Robespierre,  was his reign termed as reign of terror? 4
109.  the main features of Stalin's collectivization programme. 
110.  the main features of Stalin's collectivization programme. 
111.  effects did Nazism have on the school system?  four points.
112  effects did Nazism have on the school system?  four points.
113. various reforms introduced by Robespeire,  was his reign termed as reign of terror? 
114.  are the two physical divisions of the Peninsular plateau?  three characteristics of each division. 
 115.   four points in favour of democracy. 
116.   four salient features of Indian constitution. 
117.  the four requirements of the production of goods & services. 4
118. does unemployment affect the overall growth of an economy?  by giving four points. 